Add support for configurable node scheduling (#156)
submariner-io/enhancements: submariner-operator/issue-149-node-placement.md

# Node Placement

[Add support for nodeSelector and toleration scheduling for submariner pods](https://github.com/submariner-io/enhancements/issues/149)

## Summary

Submariner deploys many different agents as part of its core deployment. Gateway, Globalnet Agent and

> Metrics Proxy are deployed on designated gateway nodes, while Route Aents are deployed on all nodes. There is no way

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics Proxy are deployed on designated gateway nodes, while Route Agents are deployed on all nodes. There is no way
```

for users to control or limit where the rest of the agent pods are deployed. Some users want to run these agents on
specific nodes for billing or networking reasons. Users can't add tolerations directly to these agents because they'll be
overwritten by the operator. So, users require an easily configurable way to specify these parameters.

## Proposal

This enhancement proposes adding a new field to `Submariner` and `ServiceDiscovery` for users to configure node

> scheduling. This configuration will then be applied to pods of following submariner agents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
scheduling. This configuration will then be applied to the pods of following submariner agents:
```

Reviewer 2: I would prefer

```suggestion
scheduling. This configuration will then be applied to pods of the following submariner agents:
```

* submariner-operator
* submariner-lighthouse-agent
* submariner-lighthouse-coredns
* submariner-networkplugin-syncer

Following agents will be excluded because these are run on Gateway nodes. Users already control which nodes get labeled

> as gateways and ideally we don't want to run anything else on these nodes.

Reviewer: `ideally we don't want to run anything else on these nodes.`

This line to me means that the 4 other agents (submariner-operator, submariner-lighthouse-agent, submariner-lighthouse-coredns, submariner-networkplugin-syncer) won't be running on gateway nodes. Is that true?

Author: This mainly refers to user's services, but we should prefer not to run anything else [LH, coredns etc.] on GW nodes to keep CPU free to tunnel data traffic. But that discussion is outside the scope of this PR. Scope of this is mainly to differentiate submariner pods from user pods. We can have a different EP for optimization, probably somethin we might have to when we do scale/perf testing.

* submariner-globalnet
* submariner-metrics-proxy

## Design Details

Add new `NodeSelector` and `Tolerations` fields to `Submariner` and `ServiceDiscovery` specs.

```Go
type SubmarinerSpec struct {
    ...
    ... 
    // NodeSelector defines which Nodes the Pods are scheduled on. The default is an empty list.
    // +optional
    NodeSelector map[string]string `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`

    // Tolerations is attached by pods to tolerate any taint that matches
    // the triple <key,value,effect> using the matching operator <operator>.
    // The default is an empty list.
    // +optional
    Tolerations []v1.Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty"`
}
```

```Go
type SubmarinerDiscoverySpec struct {
    ...
    ...
    // NodeSelector defines which Nodes the Pods are scheduled on. The default is an empty list.
    // +optional
    NodeSelector map[string]string `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`

    // Tolerations is attached by pods to tolerate any taint that matches
    // the triple <key,value,effect> using the matching operator <operator>.
    // The default is an empty list.
    // +optional
    Tolerations []v1.Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty"`
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: The design details should mention that the operator is going to be changed to copy these values as appropriate.

Reviewer: Exactly the answer I was looking for.

Author: Done. Also added a line about user manually adding these to CR through kubectl.

# Node Placement

[Add support for nodeSelector and toleration scheduling for submariner pods](https://github.com/submariner-io/enhancements/issues/149)

## Summary

Submariner deploys many different agents as part of its core deployment. Except for Gateway, globalnet agent and

> metrics proxy, which are deployed on designated gateway nodes, there is no way for users to control or limit where rest

Reviewer 2: This should mention the route agent as well, for completeness (even though it needs to be on every node).

    // +optional
    NodeSelector map[string]string `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`

    // Tolerations is attached by pods to tolerate any taint that matches
    // the triple <key,value,effect> using the matching operator <operator>.
    // The default is an empty list.
    // +optional
    Tolerations []v1.Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty"`
}
```

```Go
type SubmarinerSpec struct {
	...
	...
	// NodePlacement enables explicit control over the scheduling of the submariner pods.
	// +optional
	NodePlacement NodePlacement `json:"nodePlacement,omitempty"`
}
```

```Go
type SubmarinerDiscoverySpec struct {
	...
	...
	// NodePlacement enables explicit control over the scheduling of the submariner pods.
	// +optional
	NodePlacement NodePlacement `json:"nodePlacement,omitempty"`
}
```

Add option to `subctl join` to specify node selectors and tolerations.

```bash
subctl join --node-selectors LABEL_KEY_1=LABEL_VALUE_1,...,LABEL_KEY_N=LABEL_VALUE_N
subctl join --node-tolerations KEY_1=VAL_1:TAINT_EFFECT_1,...,KEY_N=VAL_N:TAINT_EFFECT_N
```

### Pros
* Provides easy way for users to configure node scheduling

### Cons
* None

### Backward Compatibility

None

### Alternatives

> None

Reviewer 2: Mention that users can’t currently add their own tolerations etc. since the operator always rewrites the relevant K8s objects and any user changes are lost. (So taking user changes into account would be an alternative approach.)

> subctl join --node-tolerations <path-to-yaml-file>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
subctl join --tolerations <path-to-yaml-file>
```

Shouldn't it be just `--tolerations` then?

Reviewer 3: Also if we're already talking about YAML, perhaps we can just let users specify fields via YAML directly then?

Author: @mkolesnik You mean allow node selector and tolerations both through yaml?

EDIT: As per discussion on slack, @mkolesnik idea is to add option for using a yaml to input all CR fields, not just tolerations and node-selector. Since such work is beyond the scope of this PR, plan is now to remove subctl changes from this EP. Users can modify the CR directly once created to apply node scheduling. A separate EP will cover adding option to `subctl` to take all CR fields through a yaml file.

# Node Placement

[Add support for nodeSelector and toleration scheduling for submariner pods](https://github.com/submariner-io/enhancements/issues/149)

## Summary

Submariner deploys many different agents as part of its core deployment. Gateway, Globalnet Agent and
Metrics Proxy are deployed on designated gateway nodes, while Route Aents are deployed on all nodes. There is no way
for users to control or limit where rest of the agent pods are deployed. Some customers want to run these agents on

> specific nodes for billing or networking reasons. Users can't add tolerations directly to these agents coz they'll be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
specific nodes for billing or networking reasons. Users can't add tolerations directly to these agents because they'll be
```

nit :)

overwritten by the operator. So, users require an easily configurable way to specify such configurations.

## Proposal

This enhancement proposes adding a new field to `Submariner` and `ServiceDiscovery` for users to configure node
scheduling. This configuration will then be applied to pods of following submariner agents:

> * submariner-operator

Reviewer 3: I believe you can add the network-plugin-syncer pod to the list, IIUC it doesnt need a pecific place to run but I might be wrong

Author: Good catch, missed it.

* submariner-lighthouse-agent
* submariner-lighthouse-coredns

Following agents will be excluded because these are run on Gateway nodes. Users already control which nodes get labeled
as gateways and ideally we don't want to run anything else on these nodes.

* submariner-gateway
* submariner-globalnet
* submariner-metrics-proxy

## Design Details

> Add a new `NodePlacement` field to `Submariner` and `ServiceDiscovery` specs.

Reviewer 3: So on official [K8s PodSpec](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.19/#podspec-v1-core) these fields are directly under it, I wonder if we don't want the same here?

AFAICT we can still bundle them up in a single `struct` to avoid repetitiveness, and use the as an embedded struct.

Author: > So on official [K8s PodSpec](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.19/#podspec-v1-core) these fields are directly under it, I wonder if we don't want the same here?
> 
I didn't get what you meant by "under it", could you clarify?

Reviewer 3: I mean they're just part of the spec (e.g. `PodSpec`) and not under another field, so to specify them you set `spec.nodeSelector` and such. You don't set `spec.nodePlacement.nodeSelector`..

So I think we can have it the same way as K8s for consistency.

Author: Aha, got it. Since we're adding these fields to a generic Submariner spec, so `NodePlacement` gives a better idea about what these two fields are being used for. Also coz that is what the similar change I used for reference in openshift was using. But I do see your point, Node Selector and toleration imply used for placement of pods on specific nodes. Am okay to go with it [simpler and less nesting] unless anyone has other ideas.

```Go
// NodePlacement describes node scheduling configuration for the pods.
type NodePlacement struct {
    // NodeSelector defines which Nodes the Pods are scheduled on. The default is an empty list.
    // +optional

>     NodeSelector map[string]string `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: Don't we want to use the official type?

https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/master/core/v1/types.go#L2801

Author: > Don't we want to use the official type?
> 
> https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/master/core/v1/types.go#L2801

I used https://github.com/open-cluster-management-io/enhancements/tree/main/enhancements/sig-architecture/58-addon-configuration as referece as that is where the initial use case came from. Okay to go with either, but do lean towards going with official type.

EDIT: BTW, PodSpec uses `map[string]string]` So I think this works better as makes it easier to just copy over to pod spec.

https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/master/core/v1/types.go#L3196

Reviewer 3: Yeah seems the more elaborate terms are used as part of `NodeAffinity`

    // Tolerations is attached by pods to tolerate any taint that matches
    // the triple <key,value,effect> using the matching operator <operator>.
    // The default is an empty list.
    // +optional
    Tolerations []v1.Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty"`
}
```

```Go
type SubmarinerSpec struct {
	...
	...
	// NodePlacement enables explicit control over the scheduling of the submariner pods.
	// +optional
	NodePlacement NodePlacement `json:"nodePlacement,omitempty"`
}
```

```Go
type SubmarinerDiscoverySpec struct {
	...
	...
	// NodePlacement enables explicit control over the scheduling of the submariner pods.
	// +optional
	NodePlacement NodePlacement `json:"nodePlacement,omitempty"`
}
```

Add option to `subctl join` to specify node selectors and tolerations.

```bash
subctl join --node-selectors LABEL_KEY_1=LABEL_VALUE_1,...,LABEL_KEY_N=LABEL_VALUE_N

> subctl join --node-tolerations KEY_1=VAL_1:TAINT_EFFECT_1,...,KEY_N=VAL_N:TAINT_EFFECT_N

Reviewer 3: This is a very simplistic way of representing these, which can also include matchers and other info (eg toleration seconds).

I wonder if we shouldn't just let users give a yaml (string or file) for this?

Author: I used `kubectl` cli for reference. Yaml/json string or file does sound like a better more flexible option, while this seems easier one.

Reviewer 3: Do you have a reference to where in `kubectl` this is available? I couldn't find it

Author: ```
Usage:
  kubectl taint NODE NAME KEY_1=VAL_1:TAINT_EFFECT_1 ... KEY_N=VAL_N:TAINT_EFFECT_N [options]

Usage:
  kubectl label [--overwrite] (-f FILENAME | TYPE NAME) KEY_1=VAL_1 ... KEY_N=VAL_N [--resource-version=version]
[options]
```

Reviewer 3: Ok but that is for the taints, I haven't seen any example where tolerations are given on the command line, only as YAML examples (which I guess you're supposed to edit/apply/patch)

Reviewer 3: @vthapar :point_up:

# Node Placement

[Add support for nodeSelector and toleration scheduling for submariner pods](https://github.com/submariner-io/enhancements/issues/149)

## Summary

Submariner deploys many different agents as part of its core deployment. Gateway, Globalnet Agent and
Metrics Proxy are deployed on designated gateway nodes, while Route Aents are deployed on all nodes. There is no way

> for users to control or limit where rest of the agent pods are deployed. Some customers want to run these agents on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
for users to control or limit where the rest of the agent pods are deployed. Some users want to run these agents on
```

specific nodes for billing or networking reasons. Users can't add tolerations directly to these agents because they'll be

> overwritten by the operator. So, users require an easily configurable way to specify such configurations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
overwritten by the operator. So, users require an easily configurable way to specify these parameters.
```

}
```

> Add option to `subctl join` to specify node selectors and tolerations.

Reviewer: This exactly answers my query here https://github.com/submariner-io/enhancements/pull/156#issuecomment-1446143690. Don't know why this was removed. But I guess others have understood and don't want to block this and hence approving.
